.. -*- coding: utf-8; mode: rst -*-

.. _dochints:

*******************
Documentation hints
*******************

The function and structure docs are autogenerated. Each function and
struct member has a short description which is marked with an [XXX]
identifier. The following chapters explain the meaning of those
identifiers.


.. _Function_identifiers_XXX:

Function identifiers [XXX]
==========================

The functions are marked with [XXX] identifiers in the short comment.
The identifiers explain the usage and scope of the functions. Following
identifiers are used:

-  [MTD Interface]

   These functions provide the interface to the MTD kernel API. They are
   not replaceable and provide functionality which is complete hardware
   independent.

-  [NAND Interface]

   These functions are exported and provide the interface to the NAND
   kernel API.

-  [GENERIC]

   Generic functions are not replaceable and provide functionality which
   is complete hardware independent.

-  [DEFAULT]

   Default functions provide hardware related functionality which is
   suitable for most of the implementations. These functions can be
   replaced by the board driver if necessary. Those functions are called
   via pointers in the NAND chip description structure. The board driver
   can set the functions which should be replaced by board dependent
   functions before calling nand_scan(). If the function pointer is
   NULL on entry to nand_scan() then the pointer is set to the default
   function which is suitable for the detected chip type.


.. _Struct_member_identifiers_XXX:

Struct member identifiers [XXX]
===============================

The struct members are marked with [XXX] identifiers in the comment. The
identifiers explain the usage and scope of the members. Following
identifiers are used:

-  [INTERN]

   These members are for NAND driver internal use only and must not be
   modified. Most of these values are calculated from the chip geometry
   information which is evaluated during nand_scan().

-  [REPLACEABLE]

   Replaceable members hold hardware related functions which can be
   provided by the board driver. The board driver can set the functions
   which should be replaced by board dependent functions before calling
   nand_scan(). If the function pointer is NULL on entry to
   nand_scan() then the pointer is set to the default function which is
   suitable for the detected chip type.

-  [BOARDSPECIFIC]

   Board specific members hold hardware related information which must
   be provided by the board driver. The board driver must set the
   function pointers and datafields before calling nand_scan().

-  [OPTIONAL]

   Optional members can hold information relevant for the board driver.
   The generic NAND driver code does not use this information.


.. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. This file was automatically converted from DocBook-XML with the dbxml
.. library (https://github.com/return42/sphkerneldoc). The origin XML comes
.. from the linux kernel, refer to:
..
.. * https://github.com/torvalds/linux/tree/master/Documentation/DocBook
.. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
