.. -*- coding: utf-8; mode: rst -*-

#######################
RapidIO Subsystem Guide
#######################

:author:    Porter Matt
:address:   mporter@kernel.crashing.org mporter@mvista.com

**Copyright** 2005 : MontaVista Software, Inc.

This documentation is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as
published by the Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General
Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA

For more details see the file COPYING in the source distribution of
Linux.


.. _intro:

************
Introduction
************

RapidIO is a high speed switched fabric interconnect with features aimed
at the embedded market. RapidIO provides support for memory-mapped I/O
as well as message-based transactions over the switched fabric network.
RapidIO has a standardized discovery mechanism not unlike the PCI bus
standard that allows simple detection of devices in a network.

This documentation is provided for developers intending to support
RapidIO on new architectures, write new drivers, or to understand the
subsystem internals.


.. _bugs:

**************************
Known Bugs and Limitations
**************************


.. _known_bugs:

Bugs
====

None. ;)


.. _Limitations:

Limitations
===========

1. Access/management of RapidIO memory regions is not supported

2. Multiple host enumeration is not supported


.. _drivers:

************************
RapidIO driver interface
************************

Drivers are provided a set of calls in order to interface with the
subsystem to gather info on devices, request/map memory region
resources, and manage mailboxes/doorbells.


.. _Functions:

Functions
=========


.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rio_drv.h
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio-driver.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :export:


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :export:


.. _internals:

*********
Internals
*********

This chapter contains the autogenerated documentation of the RapidIO
subsystem.


.. _Structures:

Structures
==========


.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/rio.h
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. _Enumeration_and_Discovery:

Enumeration and Discovery
=========================


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio-scan.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. _Driver_functionality:

Driver functionality
====================


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio-access.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. _Device_model_support:

Device model support
====================


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio-driver.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. _Sysfs_support:

Sysfs support
=============


.. kernel-doc:: drivers/rapidio/rio-sysfs.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. _PPC32_support:

PPC32 support
=============


.. kernel-doc:: arch/powerpc/sysdev/fsl_rio.c
    :man-sect: 9
    :internal:


.. _credits:

*******
Credits
*******

The following people have contributed to the RapidIO subsystem directly
or indirectly:

1. Matt Porter\ mporter@kernel.crashing.org

2. Randy Vinson\ rvinson@mvista.com

3. Dan Malek\ dan@embeddedalley.com

The following people have contributed to this document:

1. Matt Porter\ mporter@kernel.crashing.org


.. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. This file was automatically converted from DocBook-XML with the dbxml
.. library (https://github.com/return42/dbxml2rst). The origin XML comes
.. from the linux kernel:
..
..   http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git
.. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------


.. only:: html

  Retrieval
  =========

  * :ref:`genindex`

.. todolist::

